# RH442 v8.0 - Red Hat Performance Tuning: Linux in Physical, Virtual and Cloud

Table of contents:  
[Chapter 1: Introducing Performance Tuning](#chapter-1-introducing-performance-tuning)  
[Chapter 2: Selecting Performance Monitoring Tools](#chapter-2-selecting-performance-monitoring-tools)  
[Chapter 3: Viewing Hardware Resources](#chapter-3-viewing-hardware-resources)  
[Chapter 4: Configuring Kernel Tunables and Tuned Profiles](#chapter-4-configuring-kernel-tunables-and-tuned-profiles)  
[Chapter 5: Managing Resource Limits with Control Groups](#chapter-5-managing-resource-limits-with-control-groups)  
[Chapter 6: Analyzing Performance Using System Tracing Tools](#chapter-6-analyzing-performance-using-system-tracing-tools)  
[Chapter 7: Tuning CPU Utilization](#chapter-7-tuning-cpu-utilization)  
[Chapter 8: Tuning Memory Utilization](#chapter-8-tuning-memory-utilization)  
[Chapter 9: Tuning Storage Device I/O](#chapter-9-tuning-storage-device-io)  
[Chapter 10: Tuning File System Utilization](#chapter-10-tuning-file-system-utilization)  
[Chapter 11: Tuning Network Utilization](#chapter-11-tuning-network-utilization)  
[Chapter 12: Performing Tuning Hosts in Virtualization Environments](#chapter-12-performing-tuning-hosts-in-virtualization-environments)

## Chapter 1: Introducing Performance Tuning
Units of measure:

SI units (decimal):   
|||||
|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|kilo- |(k)| = 10<sup>3</sup>  |= 1,000 |
|mega- |(M)| = 10<sup>6</sup>  |= 1,000,000 |
|giga- |(G)| = 10<sup>9</sup>  |= 1,000,000,000 |
|tera- |(T)| = 10<sup>12</sup> | = 1,000,000,000,000 |
|peta- |(P)| = 10<sup>15</sup> | = 1,000,000,000,000,000 |
|exa-  |(E)| = 10<sup>18</sup> | = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000|

IEC units (binary):
|||||
|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|kibi- |(Ki)| = 2<sup>10</sup>| = 1,024 |
|mebi- |(Mi)| = 2<sup>20</sup>| = 1,048,576|
|gibi- |(Gi)| = 2<sup>30</sup>| = 1,073,741,824|
|tebi- |(Ti)| = 2<sup>40</sup>| = 1,099,511,627,776|
|pebi- |(Pi)| = 2<sup>50</sup>| = 1,125,899,906,842,624|
|exbi- |(Ei)| = 2<sup>60</sup>| = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976|

Commands:
* `man 7 units` - to see a full listing of units
* `dc` - HP RPN style calculator.  `p` to print
* `bc` - basic calculator

### Lab
Lab can be run as-is.

## Chapter 2: Selecting Performance Monitoring Tools
Processes & memory:
* `ps aux` - lists all users and processes with details (BSD format)
* `ps -ef` - lists processes with details (UNIX or POSIX format)
* `ps -p $(pidof <app>)` - lists processes for app
* `ps ax --format pid,%mem,cmd --sort -%mem` - lists processes by memory usage in descending order
* `top -n 1` - shows real-time report of activites. `-n 1` exits program after first display
* Press `F` while in top to select fields for display and for sorting
* `free -m` - shows memory usage in MB.  `-s <x>` updates every x seconds.  `-b` for bytes.  `-k` for KB. `-g` for GB.  `-h` for human readable

File system:
* `lsblk -fp` - lists block devices with full path and UUIDs
* `findmnt` - lists mounts in tree format.  `-S <dev>` finds file ssytems by specified disk device.  `-s` read file systems from `fstab`
* `df -h` - lists info about file systems in human readable format
* `du -sh <dir>` - Displays total size of files in directory and subdirs.  `-s` suppresses detailed info and only outputs total.  `-h` human readable format

Sysstat package utilities:
* `iostat <interval> <count>` - reports CPU and I/O stats. `-c` displays CPU.  `-d` for disk I/O.  `-y` omit first 'since boot' report.  `-z` omits devices with no activity
* `mpstat -P ALL <interval> <count>` - reports stats for each processor. `-I` includes h/w and s/w interrupts.  `-o json` outputs in JSON format
* `pidstat -p <pid> <interval> <count>` - shows stats by process or thread.  `-t` - per thread.  `-d` - disk. `-r` page fault. `-u` CPU utilization (default)
* `vmstat -S m <interval> <count>` - virtual memory stats.  `-S` to set unit.  See `man vmstat` for description of columns
* `sar -o report.out <interval> <count>` - generate system activity report
* `sar -q -f report.out` - reads log file.  `-q` shows queue length
* Configuration file: `/etc/sysconfig/sysstat`
* `/usr/lib64/sa/sa1` - collects data for a 1 second interval
* `/usr/lib64/sa/sa1` - writes daily reports

Performance co-Pilot (PCP):
* `sudo dnf install pcp pcp-gui pcp-system-tools` - install all components
* `sudo systemctl enable --now pmcd` - enable the service
* `pcp free` - free memory
* `pcp dstat` - general performance analysis
* `pcp dstat --time --cpu --proc <interval> <count>` - shows CPU and process stats
* `pmstat -s <count> -t <interval>` - virtual memory stats
* `pmcollectl -c <count>` - storage statistics
* `pminfo` - to query individual metrics.  No parms gives list of metrics. `-dt proc.nprocs` - number of processes
* `pmval -s <count> <metric>` - shows value of metric from pminfo
* `pmchart` - start visualation tool. `-h <remote_host>` to view data from a different host
* `pmlogger <fn>` - starts pmlogger and log files to fn
* `pmdumplog -L -Z EST+5 <fn>` - view internal details of log file
* `pmval -a <fn> <metric>` - shows value from log file.  Use `-S` and `-T` to specify a range of times to display

### Labs
The ch02s02 lab has you check the processes for the `nginx` service.  If this isn't installed use a different service.  [Nginx may be installed](https://www.nginx.com/resources/wiki/start/topics/tutorials/install/) using the instructions provided.  `stress.py` is a simple Python application.  Create this with the following:
```python
#!/usr/bin/python3
while True:
   pass
```

## Chapter 3: Viewing Hardware Resources
dmesg:
* `dmesg | head -n2` - first two lines show Linux kernel version and command line boot options
* `dmesg | grep 'dma'` - show direct memory access (DMA) zones and available memory
* `dmesg | grep 'Memory'` - memory info
* `dmesg | grep 'CPU'` - CPU info
* `dmesg -T` - time stamp in human-friendly format

Other utilities:
* `lscpu` - display processor information.  `-p` shows parsable format for all processors
* `getconf -a` - among info shown are the availability of processor L1, L2, and L3 caches
* `sudo dmidecode` - SMBIOS/DMI information
* Info above also available in `/sys/class/dmi/id/`
* `lspci` - list devices connected to PCI bus.  Use `-vv` for additional info
* `lsusb` - list devices connected to USB
* `lstopo-no-graphics` - gather and display hardware info (may need to install `hwloc` package)
* `lstopo` - GUI
* `lshw` - detailed information for hardware.  `-short` to list abbreviated version. `-C <class>` to narrow down by class

Hardware errors:
* `sudo dnf install rasdaemon` - install the RAS daemon
* `sudo systemctl enable --now rasdaemon` - start and enable the daemon
* `ras-mc-ctl --help` - see command options to work with error detection and correct (EDAC) drivers

Viewing resources from a host in a virtual environment:
* `virsh dumpxml <guest> | grep q35` - determine if guest is configured to use QEMU Q35 machine type
* `virsh dumpxml <guest> | grep "cpu mode"` - to verify mode is set to `host-passthrough`
* `lspci | grep balloon` - to verify memory balloon support
* `kvm_stat` - displays performance info for guests running on KVM host.  Use `g` to select specific guest.  `q` to quit


## Chapter 4: Configuring Kernel Tunables and Tuned Profiles

## Chapter 5: Managing Resource Limits with Control Groups

## Chapter 6: Analyzing Performance Using System Tracing Tools

## Chapter 7: Tuning CPU Utilization

## Chapter 8: Tuning Memory Utilization

## Chapter 9: Tuning Storage Device I/O

## Chapter 10: Tuning File System Utilization

## Chapter 11: Tuning Network Utilization

## Chapter 12: Performing Tuning Hosts in Virtualization Environments
